---
layout: post
published: false
title: "Strantzas's Favorite Weird Stories"
date: "2014-08-02 16:46:08"
tags: ["weird fiction", "books", "fiction", "reading", "literature"]
categories: literature
image: juniper_tree.png
---

I had the fortunate circumstance to correspond with Simon Strantzas a few
months ago and during our exchange, I asked him about his favorite weird
stories.  This was before [*Burnt Black Suns*]({% post_url 2014-06-08-burnt-black-suns %})
was out and I was looking for something to read. Simon sent me a list of his
favorites just off the top of his head and I've found them to be topnotch tales
that were also incredibly fun to hunt down and read. A few I had already read.
I really enjoyed reading the others and I think they have become some of my
favorites as well so I've decided to immortalize all of them by listing them
here.

![Juniper Tree](/public/img/posts/juniper_tree.png)

#"The Juniper Tree" by Peter Straub

This can be found in a couple collections of Peter Straub including an
eponymous one called *The Juniper Tree and Other Blue Rose Stories* from
Subterranean Press. "The Juniper Tree" is a standalone tale but I believe it
also has connections to Straub's Blue Rose trilogy, which is comprised of
*Koko*, *Mystery*, and *The Throat*. It masterfully combines youth, movies, and
disturbing horror.

#"Gas Station Carnivals" by Thomas Ligotti

This story is collected in Ligotti's work, *Teatro Grottesco*. It's part of a
cycle of stories that feature similar characters and settings. It's a rather
disturbing tale of conversations about old memories of free carnivals next to
gas stations. Ligotti does an excellent job of using the story to paint a bleak
and disturbing view of our world.

#"In the Hills, the Cities" by Clive Barker

The first time I read "In the Hills, the Cities" was in the VanderMeers'
incredible collection *The Weird* but it originally was published in the first
volume of Barker's *Books of Blood*. The *Books of Blood* are perhaps some of
the best single author horror collections of all time and this story is one
amongst many excellent short stories. In this particular story, a ritual is
performed between two small towns that is nothing short of strange.

![The Wine-Dark Sea](/public/img/posts/wine_dark_sea.jpg =300x)

#"The Inner Room" by Robert Aickman

This year [Faber & Faber have issued some beautiful reprints of a number of
Aickman's collections in the
UK](http://www.faber.co.uk/content/robert-aickman-centenary-reissues) for the
centennial anniversary of Aickman's birth. I've been reading these as they come
out and *The Wine-Dark Sea* which contains "The Inner Room" comes later this
month so I have yet to read this story. I did read *Dark Entries* and absolutely
loved the story, "Ringing the Changes." I like to think of Aickman as the
antithesis of Stephen King. His works are slow, plodding, atmospheric and often
lack the action and in-your-face gore that you'd find in works of modern
horror. His language is precise and his stories are beautifully constructed to
leave the reader in suspense until the climax.

#"The Tower of Moab" by L.A. Lewis

This work is by an author I had never heard of before. Thankfully, the
collection it appears in, *Tales of the Grotesque: A Collection of Uneasy
Tales*, was reprinted this year by a small independent publisher called [Shadow
Publishing](http://www.shadowpublishing.webeasysite.co.uk/). I was really
impressed by this tale especially since I had never heard of the author before.
It's about a odd, ancient tower and its affect on a salesman who visits it
while on a trip.

#"Apt 205" by Mark Samuels

This story gave me a very genuine feeling of unease when I read it. Very few
works do these days but Samuel's story did. Samuels does an excellent job
building an unsettling mood in this work. This work is part of Samuels's
collection *White Hands and Other Tales* from [Tartarus
Press](http://www.tartaruspress.com/index.htm). It's about a resident who finds
something terrifyingly strange in his missing neighbor's apartment.

#"Black Man with a Horn" by T.E.D. Klein

This tale is from one of my favorite collections of all time, *Dark Gods* by
T.E.D. Klein. Like most of the works in *Dark Gods*, it's a rather long
work--it's actually a novella--and it's considered to be part of the Cthulhu
mythos. The narrator makes several references to Lovecraft. It's a master work
by one of horror's best writers.

#"Mackintosh Willy" by Ramsey Campbell

This is another essential work by an essential writer. It's been featured in
numerous collections and anthologies since it was printed in 1980--and
rightfully so. The combination of psychological terror against the backdrop of
adolescence creates a superb story that helped to cement Mr. Campbell's status
as a horror fiction icon.
