---
layout: post
title: "The Time Traveler's Almanac"
tags: reading scifi fiction literature books
categories: literature
---

I just finished *The Time Traveler's Almanac* and I wanted to write down my
thoughts. *Almanac* is collection of time travel fiction and features authors
that range from Ursula K. Le Guin to H G Wells (who wrote one of the most well
known pieces of time travel fiction, *The Time Machine*) to newer,
not-so-well-known writers like [Tony Pi](http://tonypi.com/).

*The Weird* is one of my favorite--if not my most favorite--anthologies of all
time so I really didn't expect to like *Almanac* as much but I have to say that
it comes pretty darn close. For one, I felt like the stories in *Almanac* were
consistently good. In *The Weird*, there were a few stories I didn't care for
at all although I don't disagree with their presence in the anthology as I
think they would have appealed to some weird fiction fans but not me. I think
in the *Almanac* I enjoyed pretty much every story at some level.

In having so many great stories, I find it hard to compile a list of all my
favorites but I'll try to mention some. One of my favorites was "Enoch Soames"
by Max Beerbohm. It's a story from 1916 about an eccentric writer that I found
to be somewhat dark but also quite humorous in an absurdist way. Also, I found
there is [a followup
story](http://www.theatlantic.com/past/docs/issues/97nov/teller.htm) by Teller
(of Penn and Teller) that I plan to read.

Some of my other favorites were by more contemporary authors that I had not
heard of like Alice Sola Kim and Tony Pi. The latter wrote an interesting story
about the Welsh legendary prince [Madoc](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Madoc)
who shows up in present day Canada. There were also some excellent stories by
well known authors like Douglas Adams and Ursula K. Le Guin. Then there were
some well known authors I had not heard of before too like C. J. Cherryh whose
"Threads of Time" story I really enjoyed and Connie Willis whose "Fire Watch"
was another favorite of mine.

Another entry that really stood out was the novel story "Traveller's Rest"
about a soldier fighting on a frontier that seems to have a sort of time
anomaly.  The ending made me reflect on the story a great deal. Speaking of
endings, I loved E. F. Benson's "In The Tube" which was rather dark and had an
incredibly sad ending.

Overall, I really loved *The Time Traveler's Almanac*. Before I read it, I was
kind of hesitant to read it as I'm more a fan of more literary and darker
speculative fiction like weird literature. However, I'm glad I did because I
found that I actually ended up thoroughly enjoying it. It's definitely helped
me discover quite a few authors I might not have otherwise read which is always
a big benefit of reading anthologies.
