---
layout: post
title: Burnt Black Suns
categories: ['weird fiction', 'fiction', 'horror', 'reading', 'books']
---

One of the books I was really excited about this year was [*Burnt Black
Suns*](http://www.hippocampuspress.com/mythos-and-other-authors/fiction/burnt-black-suns-by-simon-strantzas)
by [Simon Strantzas](http://strantzas.com). *BBS* is a fantastic collection by
a weird fiction author who is at the top of his game. It has a nice mix of
short stories and novellas. I waited quite a long time for this work and when I
finally read it, it did not disappoint.

Simon Strantzas is a master of pace and does an excellent job of balancing that
slow and subtle strange feeling with developing excellent settings and complex
characters. Many of the longer works in this collection feel much shorter
because of this. Also, it's a very diverse collection, which made for easy
reading for the two or three days it took to complete.

The book starts with a story called "On Ice" about an Arctic expedition that
goes bad. The group finds the tracks of a small hominid that seems to be
following them through the snow. The subtle fear in this story builds over time
and ends with a horrifying conclusion.

Then came a shorter story, "Dwelling on the Past" about a man who suffered a
great loss. He infiltrates a group and comes across a terrifying find. This was
probably my least favorite story; it was good but not amazing or memorable.

"Strong as a Rock" is about two brothers who go mountain climbing. Strantzas
does a good job portraying the relationship between brothers and the place that
they end up is very unnerving. It reminded me of "The Hospice" by Aickman in
some ways and the story finished with a very sudden and disturbing ending.

"By Invisible Hands" originally appeared in *The Grimscribe's Puppets* and thus
is reminiscent of Ligotti. It's about a puppet maker that gets a request from a
mysterious Dr. Toth. I find puppets in general to be creepy so this story was
especially frightening.

The novella, "One Last Bloom", was about a couple of PhD students who get a
crate of samples. Their teacher who collected the samples though is missing.
It's a great tale and has sort of a scifi slant which I thought was
interesting.

"Thistle's Find" was a short story that was packed with weirdness and horror in
the vein of Ligotti and Lovecraft. The narrator visits an old, eccentric
neighbor (Dr. Thistle) who has made a terrible discovery. Not sure what
disturbed me more though--Thistle's discovery or Thistle.

"Emotional Dues" was another great piece about an artist who gets tasked by an
old man to create a painting. It's a longer story that does an excellent job of
building a sense of strange until the climax where all hell breaks loose.

"Beyond the Banks of the River Seine" is a tale that originally appeared in the
King in Yellow tribute, *A Season in Carcosa*. This story is about a rivalry
between two musicians in which one musician descends into madness. It's very
reminiscent of Chambers' work and while a bit slower, it does satisfy.

"Burnt Black Suns" was probably one of my favorite stories in this collection.
It's about a father who is searching for his son. It starts kind of slow but
then in the second chapter, it starts to build an excellent storyline starting
with their visit to the heath. It reminded me of William Peter Blatty in some
ways.

I'd recommend *Burnt Black Suns* to any horror or weird fiction fans. It's
probably and quite likely the best single author collection of 2014.

