---
layout: post
title: 'The Exorcist: 40th Anniversary Edition'
tags: audiobooks horror fiction reading
---

I really enjoyed *The Exorcist: 40th Anniversary Edition*. I think a big part
of why I liked it was the audiobook format. The book itself was solid but maybe
not great. However, the audiobook made the work incredible. The narrator for
the 40th Anniversary edition was William Peter Blatty, who wrote the book. His
voice seemed to fit the content of the work perfectly--it was solemn, tired,
and grave.

I found the subject matter of the book to be interesting. It had elements of
fantasy in beings that came from another world to occupy a girl's body. I'm not
sure I would even call it horror. It was more like general fiction. It was
though very frightening. The audiobook was also interesting in that they used
samples and effects at times to portray recorded audio and demonic voices.
There were only a few instances of this so it didn't feel like a bad
dramatization. It was used to great effect.

One of the things I was kind of worried about was the religious messages. I was
a bit worried that there would be moral about faith and Christianity. There
were some instances of a faith versus doubt theme but I didn't mind it at all.
In fact, most of the religious imagery added to the horror. While I don't
particularly believe in demons, the idea of them I find to be particularly
horrifying as they are probably the oldest fictional terror that humanity has
known.

Overall, the language in the book is definitely not for the faint of heart but
the audiobook was a great, entertaining experience.
